# declearn v2.0.3

Released: 04/08/2023

This is a subminor release to patch a couple of issues where some operations
were wrongfully implemented as to their maths. It is therefore **strongly**
recommended to update any existing installation to a patched version - which
may freely be `~=2.0.3`, `~=2.1.1`, `~=2.2.1` or (to-be-released) `~=2.3`.

In addition, a couple of backend fixes were pushed, notably fixing compatibility
with the recently-released scikit-learn version 1.3.

## Fixed math operations

- The `Vector.__rtruediv__` method was misdefined, so that computations of the
  form `non_vector_object / vector_object` would result in wrongful values.
  This was seemingly not used anywhere in declearn until now, and hopefully was
  not used by any end-user either.
- The `L2Clipping` optimodule plug-in was misdefined, making it scale down the
  gradients with a L2-norm below the cutoff threshold and leaving those with a
  high norm unchanged.

## Other backend fixes

- Fix the `build_keras_loss` utility for TensorFlow. This is a backend fix
  that adresses some newly-found issues with the way losses may be specified
  as part of a `TensorflowModel`.

- With the release of Scikit-Learn 1.3, the interfaced `SGDClassifier` and
  `SGDRegressor` models now have support for other dtypes than float64. In
  declearn 2.3 and above, this will be handled by adding the possibility
  to specify which dtype end-users wish to use. For previous versions, the
  backported path is merely about ensuring that input data and weights are
  converted to the default float64 dtype.
